
Keeping track with changing organizational structures:
A way back machine might be a step forward!


We maintain databases of publications from Lund university, which is a
fairly large organization with 30.000+ students, and an appropriately
sized teaching and research staff to go with that.

The publications produced should be possible to navigate (or browse)
with respect organizational structure.  However, that structure is
changing in an accelerating speed. This a costly challenge for
us. Should we change the vocabulary, and as a consequence change all
records? Or should we keep things as they are and leave departments
and even faculties having disappeared from the system?

On which departmental list of publications should John Smith's paper
appear if his department is split. Obviously, one can easily tell
given appropriate knowledge about the split, but there is no way one
can do that retrospectively for five thousand doctoral dissertation.

These problems are general. A related one is: Who should pay an
invoice sent to a department at the end of December 2003, when that
department is merging with the neighbor the first of January 2004?

The basics of navigation
------------------------

Navigation is an almost obligatory functional requirement for the
digital library. By navigation I understand user functions like
browsing of hierarchical collections of metadata. Such browsers can be
created with respect to any vocabulary which is hierarchical by nature
and typical examples are (in the context we are currently discussing)
it is classification systems, thesauri and organizational
structure. This does not mean that other context could be relevant,
eg., biological taxonomies. Hierarchical representation of thesauri
give priority to broader and narrower terms when creating the browser.

The success of a hierarchical navigation system, a browser, depends
critically on two factors. First, the quality of the labels and
connectivity of the vocabulary used, and, secondly on the quality of
the categorization. Users will be frustrated if

- category labels "does not ring a bell". The strength of navigation
  is that users are, on a cognitive, level more capable of recognizing
  what they search for when seeing it, than to recollect the
  appropriate term and spell it correctly when typing it into a search
  form.

- more specific terms appear on non-intuitive places in the browser.

- there is information which seems irrelevant for the subject matter
  of the current page in the browser.

Of these the two first points are related to the vocabulary in its
connectivity and the last one to the quality of indexing. The quality
of indexing is seldom a big issue for organizational vocabularies. An
author may have several affiliations, but in general a paper should
appear in the publication list of that organization who pays him.

Organizational navigation system are often poor, and the reason why is
exclusively because the vocabulary used is not well thought out,
lacking intuitive names of organizations and because the its structure
was never intended to be used for information retrieval. However, I
claim that an organizational structure which is good for information
retrieval is good in other ways as well.

The evolution of vocabularies
-----------------------------

This note is about hierarchies that change over time. All vocabularies
do. However, what one need to do as consequences of change differs
depending on the nature of the vocabulary.

Thesauri provide means for coping with change. The USE/USE FOR
relations are meant for (among other things) creating pointers such
that older records should be searchable. Although a new term is not
present in old records, a search engine can still hit the old ones by
automatically broaden the search to such terms.

Such procedures are not sufficient for an organizational vocabulary,
because organizations are legal entities that are likely to all kinds
of opinions on how they should be presented. Also, one would hide or
perhaps even lose potentially important data. Organisations may evolve
in several ways. The most important ones should be the following:

- units may be created
- they may be discontinued
- they may change of name
- they may split
- they may merge and form new bigger ones
- they may be moved in the organizational structure

Any these changes within should create changes in an organizational
vocabulary. However, terms should never be removed from a good
organizational vocabulary.

A relational data-model for an organizational vocabulary should
contain at least the following:

	Unit ID
	Unit name
	Date of creation
	Date of discontinuation
	
We need to be able to take into account the following many-to-many
kind of relations In addition we need to be able to cope with each
units predecessors and successors

	Predecessor Unit ID
	Successor Unit ID
	Event (split,merge,change of name)
	
Finally, we need to know to which broader unit the unit at hand is
affiliated at any moment in time:

	Narrower Unit ID
	Broader Unit ID
	Date created
	Date broken

Using this data-model will be possible to build a way-back machine,
i.e., a search engine that may permit its users to search and browse
any kind of material with respect to any organisation at any time.

And there will be no need to revise data on organisations that are
gone, neither will there be any need to revise data on publications,
archival records or descriptions using this way of handling an
organisational vocabulary.


	
